1. CAPER
The Combined Ambulatory Provider Encounter Records. These are the military
equivalent of physician billing. It is broken into two files.

CAPER - Patient - This file contains information about the patient encounter
including diagnosis and CPT codes.

CAPER - Business - This includes all of the cost data about a visit including 
RVU's broken down multiple ways. Keep in mind there are no malpractice RVU's
in the military system.

2. SIDR 
The Standard Inpatient Data Record - These are the military's version of facility
charges. They include the ICD-9/10 diagnosis and procedure codes

3. Active Duty Master Files
These are the personnel records for Active Duty personnel broken down into two file -
one for Army and one for all other services. They include where someone was 
assigned, where someone actually did their work (for instance, when I was in school
I was assigned to a student detachment in San Antonio with duty in Philadelphia). They
also include demographic information such as race, rank group and education.

4. Tricare Encounter Data
These are claims from the purchased care network. I've never worked with Medicare data
but I would imagine they are very similar. It's broken down into two files as well - one for
facility charges (TED-Institutional) and one for provider charges (TED-Non-Institutional)

5. Enrollment File
Not very granular and only applies to military dependents. Active duty are required to be enrolled in the HMO option (Tricaer Prime).
I observe the dates when someone is enrolled in TRICARE and their plan choice.
The actual enrollment file that I don't have access to yet has
much more information including the patient PCP and clinic. This information is included
in the CAPER - Patient file but can only be observed when someone seeks care. For the military population
this isn't a big problem because some care is required annually.

6. PID - NPI Crosswalk
This file provides a crosswalk between provider NPI's and military ID's so that I can find their
personnel files. It is incomplete - only going back to mid 2012. Anyone that left the military prior to
then I cannot match. I have about an 80% match rate overall that degrades the farther back I go. I am hopeful
to have a better crosswalk in the somewhat near future. 

So far I've uploaded codebooks for the CAPER files, SIDR and the Active Duty Master Files. I don't
particularly think we're going to use the other files much. I can upload them if we need them though.

